shelters have about 50 beds ea

checkin system with shared DB that keeps track of people going in/out and beds avail

what are the ways people become homeless?

    utils get turned off
    lgbt kids kicked out of home
    domestic violence - run away to escape
    lose job and become unable to pay rent

What happens when they get to them?
    Intake/assessment of need
        figure out what happened/why they became homeless
        determine if they should be diverted
        if not diverted, figure out what they need

what does a typical day look like for a person experiencing homelessness?
    person has to leave if shelter closes
        go to job, medical services, find somewhere to be
    young people
        classes throughout the day
        don't have to leave shelter
        job service Program
    lot of variation
        subpopulations
            families (women w/ kids)
        two ways to define homelessness
            living in place that doesn't meet standards
            dept of ed: moving around, staying with family & friends, temporary housing

        lot of bouncing around

what is a coc?
    continuum of care
    # of agencies in area determines how large the coc is
    need certain penetration of population in order to qualify
        HUD funnels money through cocs
        helps coordinate services
    differs between regions
        here, it's largely service providers

    organization - structured like a board
    what sort of integration is in the CoC?
        getting close to one way for entry point
        in past, there was a hotline
        certain guidelines for info gathered?
            determined by hud data collection standards
                2014 ed is newest - updated oct 1st yearly
                major document would be 2014 data standards - found on HUD exchangne

                verifying homelessness
                identifying barriers
                basic demo info
                income/benefits/insurance

        coordinated entry is the processed used

    how do you share info?
        share info through the hmis system
        different software apps
            compassrose
            servicepoint - used to collect all data
            agencies have different systems internally
            info has to be keyed twice to be put into internal systems
        informal communication is primary method
            monthly meetings
            how is information shared at meetings?
                talk about things driving efficiencies and inefficiencies
                looks at programs within coc and determines what should be funded
                    called rank and review - goes into HUD funding

        what kind of devices used to enter data?
            PCs
            meets HIPAA/HMIS policy manual
can you serve someone even if you don't have any info on them?
    outreach is about reaching out to most vulnerable
    people can refuse to answer some questions
        if some  data isn't answered, some shelters cannot provide
    gateway180 background checks their entrants

how do people come to them?
    word of mouth
    outreach services

how many people that come in have access to a smart device?
    every young person
    adult male - at least half
    most people
    about 90% had text

how does coordinated entry work?
    theoretically, when someone comes into an agency and needs services, the entry data should be input into a system that would prioritize people by level of need
        highest priority gets put into housing first
    current continuum isn't there yet

how long do you keep the data, what do you do about repeat customers?
    data can be kept forever

are people with drug & alcohol problems treated differently?
    if soeone has more severne needs, they work harder to provvide addl services

is there any way they can keep track of movement and go about days?
    if someone comes in, how do yoou know what happens when they leave?
    no way to track

any hipaa regulations preventing data sharing?
    each community can choose how they share data

how do you get data to predict if someone's becoming homeless?
    system flooded - focus is on finding the most at risk
    hotline picks up on prevention
        htoline info is not being used systematically
    no mechanism to identify members of community that are at risk
    working on better ways to solve it
    utility bills, schools have data sets, landlords often have some data

sometimes people have papers that show they were at another shelter before
    residency letter/shelter letter
        needed to get some privileges like library card or care+ voucher
        can look at electronic record
        hotline data is being tracked - how many calls, what happened, when they called

    if someone stops in and beds are full, facility calls around to others
    in poor weather, they offer seats to help get through a night


data visualization
    how does it stand now?
        the data that hmis provides doesn't tell the whole story

there are programs and resources that can help people pay bills that would prevent homelessness

there are decent counts because people go out and count people outside
